a gated d-latch is a 1-bit memory device
the D stands for data a gated d-latch is
also referred to as a data latch or
simply a D latch we're going to look at
how a D latch can be built from a gated
SR latch and examine its behavior with a
timing diagram let's first remind
ourselves of a potential problem
associated with gated SR latches
remember a gated SR latch can be
constructed from NAND gates a gated SR
latch is an active high latch in other
words both s and R are normally at low
voltage representing zeros and the pulse
is required at one of these in order to
set or reset the latch meanwhile if the
output at Q is high the latch is set and
it's storing a 1 but if Q is low the
latch is not set and it's storing a 0
the gated SR latch has a third input e
which when high enables the latch the
latch is said to be transparent when
it's enabled as elegant as it is we have
a potential problem with this circuit
there's a possibility that s and R could
be made high simultaneously this would
be like asking the latch to store a 1
and a 0 at the same time which is
nonsense in reality both Q and not Q
would become high then if both s and R
fell to 0 at the same time we'd have a
race condition the cross connected NAND
gates would race each other to feedback
their outputs making it impossible to
predict the next state of the latch this
would be like tossing a coin the latch
would end up in either one of its two
stable States needless to say this kind
of unpredictability in an electronic
circuit is usually unacceptable so what
can we do about it by simply inverting
input s with a not gate then feeding
this not gates output into R so that R
and s are always the opposite of each
other
the forbidden input combination
s equals 1 and R equals 1 can never be
applied now we can rename input s to D D
for data and now we have a 1 input gated
SR latch otherwise known as a D latch
let's see it in action while E is high
if D is high then so is Q while a is
high if D changes to low then so does Q
you can see that while a is high Q is
always the same as D and because we're
using a not gate like this there's no
possibility of the D latch ever ending
up in a forbidden state like an SR latch
might this is still a latch of course
because if equals to 0 output Q will
retain its previous value and the D
latch will no longer respond to changes
in D it's locked in its current state
let's return to our gated SR latch for a
moment by cleverly rewiring the same for
NAND gates like this we've built a D
latch in a different way it does exactly
the same thing as the D latch that we
built by using a not gate but because
we're using less components this version
is more efficient and cheaper to make
let's look at both designs together we
can see that this new version is taking
advantage of the fact that the output of
the top and gate is always the inverse
of D as long as the latch is enabled so
this output is fed back into the lower
gate a rather elegant solution let's
quickly check it is indeed doing the
same thing by tracing the highs and lows
through the gates again at the moment E
is high D is high and so is Q E is
still high D goes low and so does Q E
goes low D and Q remain as they were low
E is still low D becomes high but Q
remains low E becomes high again D is
already high so Q goes high
now let's examine the behavior of a D
latch on a timing diagram this type of
analysis might reveal some behavior we
haven't spotted yet first though we're
going to give the D latch its own symbol
so we can focus on what it does rather
than how it was built
we're interested in the relationship
between D E and Q so here they are on a
shared time axis not Q is always the
inverse of Q so we haven't included it
on this diagram at our starting point E
is high in other words the D latch is
enabled D is low and therefore so is Q
when D goes high so does Q when D goes
low so does Q you can see that while E
is high Q is following D
when E goes low Q is latched it can't
change so we can see here changes in D
are not being reflected in Q D at the
moment is low Q is high but when E goes
high again Q reflects D and once again Q
is following D on this diagram we see
E going low again so Q is no longer
following D until of course E goes high
again
to summarize them a D latch otherwise
known as the data latch can be built
from a gated SR latch either by
including a not gate or by simply
rewiring the existing NAND gates
regardless of how it was built the D
latch has its own symbol and its
behavior can be described on a timing
diagram the essence of this behavior is
that the output follows the input while
the D latch is enabled if the D latch is
disabled it retains its current state
this means the D latch can be used to
capture and store one bit of data it's a
1 bit memory device D latches are useful
for converting parallel data into serial
data a group of D latches can hang on to
several bits of data while a multiplexer
accesses them one at a time and places
them on to a serial transmission line
typically D latches are found in
input/output ports one final point
latches are sometimes referred to as
flip-flops but strictly speaking this is
not correct
latch circuitry does however form the
basis of a flip-flop and I'll be looking
at these later